Saanvi Bhumpalle
Dr. Gingrich
AP Language and Culture
March 5, 2020
With so many people that can spot out different songs or harmonize with the radio, I’m stuck wondering, what does it take for someone to identify as a musician? Kwame Anthony Appiah, a writer from The Guardian, describes “identity” as “a label we apply to ourselves and to others”. This is true, as things we identify with are usually short and objective. You’re either a physics student or you’re not. You’re either an American citizen or you’re not. You either live in Georgia, or you don’t. Does that work with being a musician, too? Can you either be a musician or not? I agree with Appiah, that labels determine our identity, but I believe we are free to change our labels or even change the meaning of our label. I can say I am a musician, meaning that I seriously practice music as a hobby. Someone else could believe that when I classify myself as a musician, I want my career to be in the field of music. Identity is up to people’s interpretation. Belonging to a group can be a form of someone’s identity. And in this case, I qualify as a musician among other groups. 
Because I started devoting large amounts of time to music, it started to shape my life from a young age. I don’t remember much from my time as a 2nd grader, but there is one moment I can recall. One day in our music class, we were singing a song about Helen Keller. I remember singing really loud along with the rest of my classmates. We were immensely bored, as we’d been singing this song for about a month. I think we started to just yell the words, rather than actually singing it. Out of nowhere, my old music teacher whispered to me, “You have an amazing voice”. 
Now, I don’t know if he told me that because it was true, or if he just wanted me to shut up because I was blasting the song into his ear. Reasons aside, it boosted my ego enough for me to ask my parents to take voice lessons. They agreed and within a few months, I was taking voice lessons at PeggyStill School of Music. I also started taking piano lessons there to help increase my musical sense. I had no interest in playing the piano but the school had advised that it would help with my voice lessons. I reluctantly agreed. Although I hated taking piano lessons at the beginning, I loved going home and playing it for fun. I would sit at the piano for hours, trying to hash out a melody I heard on the radio. If I heard a song I liked anywhere, I would rush to the piano and try to play it immediately. The satisfaction of an amazing song? That will always make me feel appreciative of music in general. If something as good as this song exists, then there are better things out there as well.  
My first music book was a book full of theater songs. It is now covered with stickers, each one for the effort I put in. The book made me spend time learning Disney songs in a different way than I was used to. From what I learned, singing was not all about listening to the song and repeating it; you had to actually read notes. Because of this, sight-reading was a huge struggle for me. 
I had many problems when it came to learning music. The only solution was practice. Now, playing a song three times can be enjoyable. But I dreaded the moments when I had to play the same melody thirty times to completely learn that portion of the song. When I was learning the C-major scale for the first time, I had to practice every day. I hated it because it wasn’t even a real song; it was just a scale. One day I was practicing it on my keyboard at home, playing it over and over again, and eventually getting so frustrated that I whacked my keyboard off its stand and broke a couple of keys. I was scared that I would get in trouble, but at least I didn’t have to play that again. At that moment, I never thought I would ever be able to play the C-major scale. I was seriously considering never playing piano again. But something changed. I realized that these scales and “useless” exercises were going to help me increase my technique for much harder songs in the future. So, I kept practicing every day. I learned to let go of my frustration, I started to pay attention to details that I had missed before, and I was tedious in making sure everything I played was correct. I would play the song, mess up, and then start over. One slight mistake, and I had to start again. I used to wonder, “Who cares if Mozart wants that note?” I did not want to play it. Now I just go with it. There is a reason that note it there. It shapes the character of the song. I learned to appreciate the details in music from practicing all the time. It takes hard work, and music has taught me that details are always important. 
 
Throughout the course of my life, music has found a way to slip into my environment, my surroundings, and my thoughts. And because of this, I remember events from my life through particular songs I was listening to at the time. When I hear the song, “Riptide”, by Vance Joy, I’m reminded of getting lost in the middle of the night and getting home three hours late. Songs influence the way musicians live their lives. If I hear a song and don’t know the name of it, it will bother me for the rest of the day, or until I figure out the name and artist. Being a musician has encouraged me to work hard and stay diligent. It taught me how important practice and repetition was from a young age. 
The Cambridge dictionary defines a musician as “someone who is skilled in playing music, usually a job”. Musicians are extremely talented; they can play an instrument or sing. They can read music and use it as a creative outlet. A musician is able to recognize and appreciate different genres. There is a difference between those who play music and those who are musicians. Real musicians have the “ability to think on the fly. It’s your ability to collaborate… [the] ability to improv and adjust” (Loving). Being able to improvise on melodies with ease is an essential skill for a musician. It is a skill I have recently tapped into, but still, need to work on. Knowledge of basic music theory is another crucial element of being a musician. Which measure is the Sforzando on? This is a question that most musicians should be able to answer easily. Musicians do not have to pursue music as a career. It can also be a hobby. Nan Nowell, a music teacher, has known a lot of excellent musicians who did something else with their lives. She says she“[knows] people with perfect pitch who are lawyers or doctors”. Just because someone became a lawyer does not mean they don’t spend a great amount of time on music. Musicians spend time on music because they truly enjoy it and cannot imagine going through life without it. Taylor Swift, a songwriter and pop artist, recently released a documentary called Miss Americana where she describes her journey with music. Swift says “I know that without me writing my own songs… I wouldn’t be here.” She describes her songwriting career as the reason she became successful and happy. Musicians are especially grateful for their choice to play and explore music every day.  


Although one does not have to pursue music as a career, many see musicians as people who play music at local cafes or bars and earn extraordinarily little. Some forget about music teachers, music professors, songwriters, lyricists, and orchestra players. People see musicians like the ones who have “failed.” Just because someone is “not on the radio” doesn’t mean they are not successful in the field of music. They could have written a song on the radio. Many people assume that musicians are born with musical talent. This may be true in some cases, but many musicians practice to get where they are. I’ll listen to recordings of myself singing or playing piano from a few years ago and I am thankful I kept practicing since then because the improvement is especially noticeable. With music, you can only become good if you put in the time. 
Besides being a musician, I am also a bookworm and a Hindu. Involving myself in these groups has changed the way I perceive the world. Without being a musician, I would have never learned to appreciate music. If I wasn’t always reading as a kid, perhaps I would never have admired the value of words. Involving myself in these groups has influenced my identity. I was not born with my identity, and it can change over time. It has been nurtured over the years, with piano lessons, singing warm-ups, and reading books late into the night. Sure, my name and my appearance can be a way people identify me. However, I see that my interests, and the activities I have dedicated time towards have molded me into the person I am today. 




























Works Cited
Nowell, Nan. Personal interview. 20 February 2020.


“MUSICIAN: Definition in the Cambridge English Dictionary.” MUSICIAN | Definition in the Cambridge English Dictionary, Cambridge, dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/musician.


Loving, David. “What Makes You a Musician.” Beat, Vocal Media, 2018,     vocal.media/beat/what-makes-you-a-musician.


Miss Americana. Directed by Lana Wilson, performance by Taylor Swift*, Tremolo Productions, 2020. Netflix. https://www.netflix.com/title/81028336